This will be NASA special report number 237, 14 minutes 30 seconds. Coming in 3,
2, 1.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration presents a special
report on the flight of Discovery, the next space shuttle mission. We have a go
for main engine start. Seven, six, five. We have main engine start. We have a
cutoff. We have an abort by the onboard computers of the Orbiter Discovery. Last
June, an onboard computer on the space shuttle Discovery detected a valve
failure and ordered a shutdown of the craft's main engines just a few seconds
before liftoff. It was the first launch abort in the 12 mission history of the
shuttle program and the second such abort in the 23 years of American manned
space flight. The first occurred during the Gemini 6 mission in 1965. Jesse
Moore is the acting shuttle director at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C.
Each engine, I should say, has a full redundancy in it in that the fuel lines,
the controller of the engine, the fuel valves, the actuator valves are fully
redundant and we started the launch attempt and we got into that count sequence
a very short period of time and then we sensed we had a problem with one of the
valves and engine number three. And the system immediately switch from channel A
to the redundant channel B and started the operation. The general purpose
computer at that time sensed that that we didn't have full redundancy on each of
the engines, so it started a shutdown sequence. That's the way the system was
designed, and at the time the shutdown sequence occurs, we inhibit the ignition
command to the solar rocket boosters so the shuttle doesn't lift off. The faulty
engine has been removed from Discovery and has gone through rigorous testing at
NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories in Mississippi. We feel very
confident that we will be able to identify the problem that we had on the launch
pad and that we have since put a new engine back into Discovery. And the engines
we have on Discovery now are the original engines that we had on board at the
time we did a flight readiness firing back in the May time frame prior to our
attempted launch in June. So we feel very confident that the engines will work
fine on this upcoming launch of Discovery. NASA is planning to combine the cargo
from what was to be the June flight, or 41D, and a second flight originally
slated for August 29. The payloads and Discovery's flight now include the solar
array, designed to study the possibilities of obtaining electrical power from
the sun for future satellites, and the electrophoresis experiment, a 700-pound
box designed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation to manufacture drug components in
orbit for medical purposes. Both of these experiments were originally scheduled
for Discovery's first flight. The astronauts will also deploy several
communication satellites. We've added an SBS satellite, and we've also added a
Telstar 3C satellite on board, a communication satellite. So the cargo for the
41D launch, now planned for August, includes most of the elements we originally
had on Discovery, with the exception of a large-format camera, plus these two
additional communication satellites. In the future, NASA would like to develop
the flexibility of accommodating changing cargos and still remain on schedule
with the shuttle manifest. Some payloads are more complicated to change out at
the last minute than other payloads. And those payloads that are fairly
complicated to change out typically involve a lot of software changes to the
basic flight software. In other words, they require some integration with the
overall flight software. and where you've got a high degree of integration, it
takes longer to change them out. Where the software interface is very small,
it's simple, you can make changes very quickly. And some cargos require very
little software interfaces. And NASA has recently initiated another program
which is going to allow us to achieve much more flexibility while flying more
complicated scientific payloads, and that program is called the Hitchhiker
Program. And it is being developed in two phases. One phase of it's in
development out at the Goddard Space Flight Center, and this concept will use a
kind of a flat plate that mounts on the side of the orbiter, and it only gets
very simple power and command and telemetry interfaces, while it can still carry
some fairly complicated scientific instruments. The other program is being
developed at the Marshall Space Flight Center, and it has a little bit more
capability in terms of carrying more experiments, but it essentially is designed
along the same principle to maintain a very simple interface with the orbiter
such that it only gets the essential power and data and command interfaces and
it also can carry some fairly sophisticated and complex scientific instruments.
These can be integrated at the very late stages of the game on board the shuttle
so you don't have to go back and make major interface changes. The crew on
Discovery's maiden flight will remain the same as was assigned to the 41D June
mission. Hank Hartsfield, Commander. Michael Coates, pilot, mission specialists
Judy Resnick, Steve Hawley, and Mike Mullane, and payload specialist Charlie
Walker from McDonnell Douglas, who will be operating the electrophoresis
experiment. Certain of these crew members had already trained for the release of
these communication satellites, which, in effect, are the only two new
additional payload elements we've put on board. Jesse Moore said that Atlantis,
the last of the four space shuttle orbiters that make up the space shuttle
fleet, is now in its final stages of development. Atlantis is doing super. We
made a decision about four or five months ago to extend the delivery date of
Atlantis until the April time frame of 1985. And we made this decision on the
basis of carrying out some modifications that we wanted to implement in the
program on Orbiter 102, which is Columbia, which is our first orbiter. We're
bringing Columbia basically up to a fully operational status. It was our first
vehicle and went through the development parts of the program, and we want to
make it more operational and easier to turn around. Columbia's modifications
will be completed about the end of this year. So in early to middle part of
1985, we'll have four operational vehicles. And our flight rate increases next
year to about 11 flights. NASA has been discussing the possibility of building a
fifth orbiter. We are implementing a structural spares program that buys some
parts of a new orbiter. However, to implement a full orbiter takes a lot more
than the structural spares program, and the agency is debating and evaluating
the possibility of a fifth orbiter right now, so we know we have not made a
decision yet. For many years, the possibility of flying into space was limited
to trained astronauts. NASA is now looking into the possibility of flying
ordinary citizens into space. Journalists, poets, writers, scientists, engineers
or anyone with a particular experiment or job to do in space. We're very
enthusiastic about it. The decision has not been made in terms of when the
specific announcement will will come out regarding the citizen observer program,
although I do expect that quite frankly to be very soon. What we're doing in the
shuttle program, and that's something the administrator of the agency and others
need to sit down and decide on the timing of that, and I cannot comment either
on the criteria because I think we need to take a look at the criteria depending
upon the type of program that we want to implement. But let me just say
generally the criteria will be that there will be certain training requirements
that we will ask the citizens to go through, obviously much less stringent than
what the flight crews, the astronaut crews go through. to, medical standards
would have to be met, etcetera. And once the program is officially announced we
will then proceed writing the ground rules and doing the criteria for the
evaluation and selection of the candidates in the program. As far as the shuttle
activities are concerned, we are anticipating being able to fly private citizens
from this program in the very late 1985 time frame, possibly early 86 time
frame. And we have not settled on how many citizens we would fly per year, but
it will be on the order of 2 to 3 flights per year we would like to invite
private citizens to fly on. It's just a little premature to get more definitive
than that at this point in time. We have been getting an inordinate amount of
phone calls and letters from others around the world that really want to be on
that list. So it's going to be a very challenging program for NASA to take all
the applicants and screen all the applicants and select down to the very, very,
very few because we see in our own astronaut recruiting program where we're
trying to recruit permanent members of the astronaut corps that we get an
enormous number of applications. And obviously the requirements for the
astronaut program are fairly stringent. And even with those stringent
requirements, we get an awful lot of applications. in this last selection
process we went through. If my memory serves me correct, we got over 5,000
applications to be an astronaut. And we're only able to select about 16 to 17.
So that's a very, very tough filter to go through. And we didn't even accept a
lot of applicants that didn't meet some initial screening requirements. And we
only received 5,000. So it's gonna be a tough process to screen down and narrow
down to the few that will be selected for flight. But we're excited about the
program and it will give citizens and various professional levels of life to
take an opportunity to participate with us in this very exciting program and
share some of the experiences at the this agency and its astronauts and others
in the program have shared since the shuttle the inaugural flight back in April
of 81. A number of companies are considering flying their experiments on the
space shuttle. We have a program called a Join Endeavor program that we sign up
mutually for the with a company in terms of trying to help get an initial
experiment program going. And we provide assistance to them in terms of flying
them free, on board the shuttle, in the early phases of their experimental
program. And a classic example of what we've done so far is the McDonnell
-Douglas Johnson & Johnson joint endeavor with NASA. And their efforts are
thrust in the continuous-flow electrophoresis experiment, which we've flown
several times before and are planning to fly on the upcoming discovery flight in
August, and we're also flying their payload specialists. Charlie Walker will be
on this crew. And Charlie is from the McDonnell Douglas Company and actually
participated in the design of this continuous flow electrophoresis experiment.
So, and we're providing him an opportunity to fly. Assisting him in flying and
using his experimental equipment in space for doing this kind of research. And
NASA believes that that is a very strong incentive and contribution to the
industry of providing them early access to space, to demonstrate and test out
some of their objectives so that later on, if they move in to a commercial
endeavor in this thing, then NASA will get reimbursed for the flights after the
program has proceeded past the very early phases. So, that's kind of an
incentive, a very good incentive, I think, that the agency is very supportive
of. Last February, two satellites deployed from the Space Shuttle Challenger
were lost in space after small rocket motors on the satellites failed to place
them in the desired geosynchronous orbit, 22,400 miles above Earth. On a later
mission this year, NASA may attempt to rescue these satellites. You're referring
to the events that occurred in February when we successfully deployed the Palapa
B satellite and the Westar satellite. And then the nozzles on these rocket
motors failed. And we have been working with the customers, in this case,
Western Union for Westar and the Indonesian government for the Palapa spacecraft
to see if they would request or want to request NASA to go and retrieve them.
And we believe the situation is such today that we still are optimistic about
being officially requested to go and retrieve those two satellites, although we
still do not have a formal request from either the Indonesians or Western Union
or the underwriters which represented those insurance companies which insured
those two particular launches. However, NASA is doing everything to preserve the
opportunity to retrieve those satellites and preparing for the opportunity to
retrieve them in the event we are formally asked to go retrieve them, and that
mission would take place in the early November time frame. And we believe, as I
said, in an optimistic sense that NASA will be asked to go and retrieve those
satellites, and we think we can successfully carry that out. NASA would command
the satellites to fire their small engines, lowering their orbits so that
Challenger could reach them. If that worked, the satellites would be ordered to
slow their spin rate to about one revolution per minute. An astronaut wearing
the jet-powered manned maneuvering unit could move from Challenger to rendezvous
with the satellites. Yes, it will be very similar to the Solar Maximum mission
where we will use our man maneuvering unit and an astronaut to go out and affix
an attachment device to the satellite so that we can go and rendezvous with it
with the shuttle and grapple it and bring it back into Cargo Bay and store it
for its return back to Earth. We're very excited about the opportunity that we
hope to have in terms of going to retrieve these satellites. I think the future
potential of the shuttle is virtually unlimited and we're very excited about the
potential of the shuttle.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, has presented an
interview with Jesse Moore, acting director of the Space Shuttle Program at NASA
headquarters.